once around pulsar
planets. Who would have thought that
these remnants of a supernova, these
collapsed cores, neutron stars rotating
rapidly as a result of the conservation
of angular momentum, just like a skater
when they pull their arms in on an ice
rink, they spin up faster. As the core
of a giant star collapses in an
implosion to form a neutron star, that
neutron star will be spun up to very
wild speeds indeed. And of course,
neutrons have a magnetic moment. So the
result is a highly magnetic rotating
object. Perhaps they one and a half
times the mass of our sun spinning 30
times a second. They beam out radio
pulses along
uh out towards us and if they happen to
come to earth we can hear them with our
radio telescopes. Joselyn Bell
discovered the first one using the IPS
array at the Mard radio telescopes just
south of Cambridge a number of years
ago. Since when of course we have found
a very large number of these interesting
objects but it's somewhat surprising to
think about the idea that such a
rotating neutron star or pulsar could
have any surviving planets that manage
to go through the supernova explosion
and not be completely
destroyed. that this uh is made a little
bit more difficult for us because we
don't seem to be finding planets around
massive stars. Now it could be that the
early days of a massive star see such a
large amount of radiation uh solar winds
and so on pouring off the star that the
disc of gas and dust the protolanetary
disc out of which the planets could
potentially condense never gets a chance
and is blown away. So maybe we're not
seeing planets around these giants
because there aren't any. they never get
a hope of
forming. But another factor is that
actually when a
star of this mass goes through its
evolutionary life cycle and swells up
into the giant
phase, the hydrogen in the core is
exhausted. You end up with an inert ball
of helium surrounded by a shell of
hydrogen fusing away, driving the outer
layers outwards, turning it into a giant
star. These things can
swallow all the innermost planets of a
system. We think that the Earth may well
get swallowed when our sun swells up.
And our sun is only a fairly modest
star. these giants will do so much more
rapidly and to a larger size. So, it
could be that uh any inner planets don't
stand a chance in the surviving the
giant phase, let alone getting to the
supernova. The other factor is that
further out such planets have less
influence on their stars. If someone
were to try to discover Jupiter by
looking at the sun and waiting for a
transit event, they would have to wait
perhaps to see it three, four, or five
times, passing in front of the line of
sight and blocking some of the light
from the star in order to be
sure. And that's going to take 12 years
for each orbit. So to see three, you
have to wait at least 24
years, probably longer. And to really be
sure, you may have to wait, I don't
know, 50 or 60 years to get enough data
from enough transits to be sure that
what you're seeing is a real
planet. The other methods that rely on
the gravitational wobble caused to the
star by the mass of the planet in orbit
also don't work so well if the planet is
further away. Clearly, the force of
gravity reduces as a square of the
distance. And of course with these giant
stars, the mass ratio is hugely in favor
of the star anyway. So maybe it
shouldn't be a surprise that we're not
able to find such
objects around these giant
stars. And of course when the supernova
explodes, it ejects about 50% of the
overall mass of the system in a very
violent explosion. And any uh planets or
indeed the resulting pulsar right out of
the core of a star may well get quite a
big kick as these somewhat irregular
explosions go off. And that could cause
the pulsar and the planet to be
accelerated, not even in the same
direction perhaps. And there's a very
very good chance that the result will be
that the planet becomes unbound, no
longer attached to the uh gravitational
influence of the pulsar. Not least of
which is because the pulsar's only got
half the mass now. So the planet's
probably got too much velocity for its
orbit even before it gets a kick. Um, so
there's a good chance that these planets
might get lost and escape the system and
become rogue planets orbiting the uh
galaxy all on their
own. But after a supernova explosion,
you may well get a disc of material
forming around the resulting pulsar, the
ejected material gathering together. It
has to be cold in order to do this. If
it's very hot, the energy will just
prevent this from happening. So, it
needs to cool down first. So, it might
take a while, but you might get a planet
forming out of one of these discs. And
such a planet would be very interesting.
It would be very rich in metals, the
heavy elements, and loaded with
radioisotopes because these supernova
remnants are absolutely stuffed full of
radioactive material. And well, we
haven't found any of these
either. But a third possibility exists
that the pulsar could acquire material
from a companion star. If there was a a
binary star system, one explodes and
forms a pulsar and the second star
survives this, then it could reach the
evolutionary stage where it too swells
into a giant. When they do that, they
tend to not have very strong grip on
their outer layers. And the material can
overflow into what's called the rash
limit, the point where the gravity of
the pulsar is actually going to win. And
the material spirals down into an
accretion disc feeding the pulsar, but
perhaps also forming a planet in and
around the pulsar.
You might even be in the situation where
the star, the companion star, could get
stripped of its outer layers by the
energy from the pulsar or indeed from
the
supernova and that that could leave a
planet-sized remnant
behind. Now, that might be very much
rich in carbon, especially if it came
from a white dwarf star.
Most white dwarf stars originate from
stars a little heavier than the sun and
as a result they create a core where
they have fused helium into carbon in
the center and some oxygen as well. And
such a system could be described as a
black widow or indeed you could describe
it as a planet made of diamond because
the carbon is likely to crystallize in
the immense pressures inside such a
massive object as the core of a white
dwarf. But finally, piracy. You might
well find that the pulsar is able to
steal planets from a companion star
system. You might have an innocent star
system sat next door as a part of a
binary system or just relatively nearby.
And the pulsar might end up wandering
into the system and stealing all the
planets. And of course, it could capture
any wandering rogue planets that happen
by. But I think that's perhaps the least
likely of all of these
mechanisms. So how would we go about
finding pulsars with planets? Well, this
the mechanism is to use the fact that
the rotating pulsar, so you have one and
a half times the mass of the sun in a
volume just uh contained in a ball 20
kilometers across spinning round 30
times a second. There's a lot of angular
momentum tied up in such a thing and
they are very very stable as a result.
So the pulses are regular as clockwork.
That's what caused Joselyn Bell to write
LGM on the paper tape, thinking that the
pulses she was seeing were so regular
they could perhaps come from
aliens. Somewhat tongue andcheek, not
entirely serious, but a good
joke. Anyway, so we have these regular
signals coming from the pulsar. But if
the pulsar has a companion and is moving
back and forth slightly caused by the
gravitation of its uh binary partner,
then we would see that in the timing of
the arrival of the pulses and we would
be able to infer the presence of the
companion be that a star or indeed a
planet.
Now, rather famously back in 1991,
Andrew Lynn and Matthew Bales were
studying pulsars, in particular PSR
1829-10, a 1.4 solar mass pulsar 30,000
light years away. Uh these radio signals
are detectable at very long distances.
And he produced results indicating that
there was a planet in a six-monthlong
orbit. And this would have been the
first report of an exoplanet around any
star, pulsar or ordinary star. This was
years before the discovery of 51 Pegasai
B and the exoplanet rush that then
followed.
However, in doing these measurements,
you have to correct for the motion of
the Earth.
The earth goes around the sun in 12
months and so the wobble of the
pulsar is combined with the two and fro
motion of the earth. So you have to
subtract this out. And Andrew had indeed
done this before dealing with and
announcing the
result. But the earth's orbit is in fact
slightly elliptical. It goes around the
sun in an ellipse with the sun at one
focus just like Kepler's laws told us
and as it's at the perihelion the near
point it moves a little faster and as
it's further away it moves a little
slower also something that Kepler taught
us. So in fact you don't have to
subtract a regular 12 month cycle in
calculating what the pulsar is actually
doing from the observations. You have to
allow for the speeding up and slowing
down of the Earth, otherwise it will
inject a six-month variation in the
timings, which of course is what
happened. And so Andrew Lynn's planet
did not exist. We also have to do this
with sund dials. If you go to a sund
dial, you will find a little plaque on
it labeling it with the equation of
time, which sounds like something from
Doctor Who, but in fact is just simply
telling you how far or behind ahead or
behind the sun is compared to a normal
clock as a result of this change in the
Earth's orbital speed around the sun on
its journey.
However, just a year
later, another group of astronomers
analyzing another
pulsar got a valid answer. PSR 1257 + 12
is now named Lick and has three planets,
B, C, and
D. B, the uh innermost planet is tiny,
just uh 2% of the mass of the Earth. C
is 4.3 and D
3.9. And these were announced and
confirmed in uh 1992 to 1994 as you can
see there along with the other data
about them.
Now these have been considered
relatively important discoveries and the
international community has started to
allow uh competitions and nominations
for names of stars and indeed
exoplanets. So the star is named Lick
and the first planet B has now been
given the name Draur and it's roughly
the size of Mercury, 33% the Earth's
radius, only 2% of the mass. Um that
shouldn't be a surprise because if
you're uh 1/3 the radius, you're 127th
of the volume. Um which is not much
different to uh just a few percent. So
relatively under dense perhaps
suggesting that it doesn't have an iron
core or anything. Um perhaps made of
lighter elements and getting some energy
from the pulsar raising it up to just a
chilly minus
7. The second planet out planet C is
been given the name poltergeist. I love
that. It's double the radius of the
Earth. So, it encompasses eight times
the volume, but only has 4.2 times the
mass. Again, relatively under dense,
suggesting it's not made of a metal
core. Um, and being further away from
the source of energy, a chili minus
80. And the third
one, Phobiore is also a super Earth,
150% the size of the Earth um and 3.9
times the mass. So, same story for this.
And these are possibly
um going to be very carbonri and they
may well have resulted from the
disruption of one of those carbon white
dwarf stars uh that have has then
recondensed into this planetary system
orbiting around the pulsar. And I find
it just amazing that we are able to
infer the presence of these guys.
You wouldn't really want to go there on
your holidays due to the low
temperatures, but also due to the
intense radiation that they must be
being subject to from the pulsar. It's
going to strip away any uh atmosphere.
There's going to be matter, antimatter
streams coming from the pulsar,
electrons and posetrons irradiating the
surface. Thoroughly nasty place indeed.
Um, so with that, I'll just leave you
with this graphic of uh the star Lick
and its three known planets, the first
pulsar planets to be discovered. And
thanks very much for listening.